
# The Serpent in the Brain: A Neuroscientific Perspective on Archetypes

<a href="https://dominiquemakowski.github.io/archetypes/">
<img src='img/cover_border.png' align="right" height="550" /> </a>

***Disclaimer:* This is a compilation of thoughts that might be someday
used in a fictional novel. It does *not* reflect any personal beliefs.**

***Warning:* This is a work in progress, being currently just a
collection of unstructured information.**

-----

  - Read online
    [**here**](https://dominiquemakowski.github.io/archetypes/)
  - Download the pdf
    [**here**](https://github.com/DominiqueMakowski/archetypes/raw/master/pdf/archetypes_makowski.pdf)

-----

# Preface

***Disclaimer:* This is a compilation of thoughts that might be someday
used in a fictional novel. It does *not* reflect any personal beliefs.**

***Warning:* This is a work in progress, being currently just a
collection of unstructured information.**

-----

The idea that the mind is deeply organized along universal lines has
always been fascinating to me. Although strongly criticized and mostly
debunked by science, the notion that cognition is structurally clustered
in a similar way across time and space has endured, gradually leaving
the prison of scientific psychology to pervade other fields, such as
history of arts, literature and anthropology. In fact, the notion of
archetypes has become quite popular in the recent years, evidence being
“found” within the redundancies of Human behaviours, myths and stories
of old. In turn, understanding and acknowledging the existence of
archetypes is often presented as a step toward personal development, if
not mental health.

**But beyond the scent of pseudo-science that emanates from this
concept, do archetypes make any scientific sense?**

Archetypes, as they are commonly defined and conceptualized (i.e., with
a Jungian-based psychodynamic approach), are hardly compatible with the
current scientific knowledge. For instance, Jung’s collective
unconscious has no place in light of what we know about neurogenesis,
neurodevelopment, and functional or structural neuroanatomy. Similarly,
research on personality and psychological inter-individual differences
does not support the existence of profiles that would resemble commonly
described archetypal figures (for example the warrior, the hero or the
old man). Nonetheless, I think (and hope), that a scientific approach to
archetypism (the study of psychological archetypes) is possible and
potentially interesting. Thus, the goal of this book is to provide a new
and rational perspective on archetypes, informed by biology, psychology,
and neuroscience.

My own journey started as a naive interest for psychoanalysis in
general, and a particular appeal for the deeply hidden core(s) of our
being. But that original appeal did not last very long. The first blow
was given by the *Black Book of Psychoanalysis* \["Le livre noir de la
psychanalyse"; @borch2005livre\], that superbly and elegantly exposes
and deconstructs most of the psychodynamic approach. And yet, my
disillusionment was not complete, as Jung’s “Depth Psychology” somehow
resisted and maintained some level of magnetism in the back of my mind.
Indeed, possibly related to my shared interest for myths and history of
religions, or to some other unconscious motivation, I found Jungian
mythological and cross-cultural perspective attractive (or, at least,
interesting). But as my knowledge grew, I could no longer ignore the
evidence… And that evidence is presented on a golden plate in the
excellent book titled “Jung et les archétypes. Un mythe contemporain”,
in which @lequellec2013jung casts compelling doubt (if not fire) upon
the whole Jungian enterprise. Reading it finally cured from all
psychodynamic non-sense. But it left me wondering; what is left of
archetypes in this landscape of burning ashes?

**As a phoenix, can this idea be reborn?**

![Phoenix illumination from the Aberdeen Bestiary (12th
century).](img/phoenix_aberdeen_bestiary.jpg)
